There's a book called Alive, about the guy who survived for 72 days, just sort of grabbing fish, and he had a spill that he kept hearing.
And then there's a book called, a really horrifying book, which is called Albatross, by a woman who was on a delivery crew of a boat called the Trashman that found it off the Carolina Capes.
And that is really a scary one.
When you read these, you kind of store them, don't you, I guess?
Sure.
They show up in other ways, I would think.
I store them, and I stand up for a couple of purposes.
I mean, I always put myself out there.
I mean, I always think of myself as being out there on the boat.
I'm not writing much about the sea these days.
I mean, I'm...
None of my stories, well, except for one of the, I don't know whether you've read the new book.
I have it, yeah, right here.
One of those stories takes place on a boat.
of sailing down off St.
Lucia.
But none of the others have much to do or anything to do with sailing.
Of course that's sailing, but when you say I put myself out there, I wonder if that applies... No, I mean I imagine myself out on the boat.
I understand that, but I wonder if just to expand that, you know, do you do that with all of these things?
Well, sure I do.
I mean, it's an appropriate metaphor because, of course,
You know, I mean, when I was writing Out of Bridge Reach,
I couldn't have identified more with the guy who was trying to... In fact, I even tried to bring him back alive.
Did you?
I figured out if there wasn't a way, I couldn't do it.
I mean, you know, I identified with Strickland, who was trying to make a movie about it, and I identified with him because he was trying to do something special, something he was trying to extend, and so was I.
Do you try to do that in general, do you think?
Bring them back alive, so to speak?
Do you look for the... It's funny, you know, the writer in California, what the heck's his name, Lenny Michaels.
Leonard Michaels, yeah.
Yeah, he took a quote from one of Lord Byron's diaries and he used it as a title.
And the title is, I could have saved them.
You know, I would have saved them if I could.
And it was Byron at an execution in Rome.
Come on.
And he saw these guys being put to death.
And he wrote, I guess it was a letter.
And he said, of course, I could have saved them if I could.
Typically Byronic, right?
They probably forgot about it five minutes later, too.
And Lenny Michaels used that as a title.
But I think, you know, I would save them all if I could.
I would have saved them.
I have to tell you this, the novella here of the new collection is...
Absolutely a powerful, powerful story.
Now, this is almost something I think that could have even been a novel.
Is that a fair... Yeah, I mean, it is a novella, and in a way, it's a stripped-down novel.
It's a novel.
I'm a stripper down.
I really believe in economy.
I think you don't use more words than you need.
And, you know, I wasn't going to pan it out and make it longer.
My impulse is the opposite.
But, you know, I mean, I think it's right to call it a novella because, you know, it has the complication and the different point of view and so forth of a novel.
And, you know, in a way, it cost me like a novel.
Did it really?
Yeah.
Well, it was just...
Oh, very, just very intense.
I've been intensely involved with it.
And, you know, a lot of the emotional energy that goes into writing a novel.
I mean, it goes into a story, too, but I was less concerned in a way.
I mean, a story is like a baseball pitch, you know.
It breaks, and if everything goes right, the guy swings and flocks in the glove.
It's one long motion.
And this was not quite like that.
This was not one long motion like a short story is.
But, of course, it depends upon your point of view.
If you're hitting, you whack it out of the park.
Well, I always think of writing short stories as like pitching.
Really?
Yeah.
Why?
Because of the action.
I don't know.
The action just reminds me of, you know, the wind-up, you let it go.
You know it's got to break.
I mean, that's got to be the epiphany.
There's got to be a break there, whatever you put on it.
Whatever kind of English you put on it, that's got to happen.
And it's got to get past the defenses of the reader in a way, in a positive way.
It's a pretty interesting metaphor with baseball season starting in a couple of weeks.
But, you know, Ted Williams always measured success as one, you know, hitting as one out of three, you know, and you're a great hitter, right?
Well, I don't see myself as a hitter.
I see myself as a pitcher.
Yeah, that's interesting.
I mean, I think that has a lot to... This particular novella, I have to say also, during what period did you write that?
Is that something that took a long time?
Over a period, I started it...
And I got the character of Gray, oh, I don't know, a while back.
I just didn't know it became of Gray.
I knew that Gray got drunk and he got thrown out of the casino.
And I was thinking of the old Frank Sinatra place on the north shore of Tahoe.
The Calnaver.
I guess we won't say that.
Well, I'm not saying it, but I visualized it myself.
The Calnaver is what it was called.
Because it has windows.
That's right.
And you can see out of it, it has that western kind of thing.
And, yeah, I was just, you know, I was shooting craps in the Kalanato.
I was behaving myself perfectly well.
I wasn't drunk.
But I just thought it was one of the few places that had the old kind of mob tone to it a little bit, you know.
I mean, everybody was perfectly, perfectly, perfectly okay.
But it just had that kind of mobbed up.
field a little bit of that left which the others don't have interestingly enough you know the new the uh the casino down in ledyard connecticut does have some windows in it
Yeah, they went counter to the whole, not throughout the building, but in the original building, you can actually look up and see that it's daytime or nighttime, and you can see the woods, which is amazing, you know.
Yeah, well, that is amazing.
Yeah, and of course it's... Where you're going to be living.
That's right.
As a person who has occasionally shot Krebs, I have to say his philosophy there was totally...
You don't say whatever.
He must have lost everything, right?
Yeah, well, he just got drunk.
And they kind of, you know, kind of intimidated.
You know, most fans, they want to keep the money on there.
They want to keep the chips on the table.
They don't want anybody picking up.
So, you know, they started that on him, even though he was the only guy there at first.
Well, he has some extraordinary runs of luck there, too.
But anyway, that's quite irrelevant.
But he is kind of shooting craps with his life, though, isn't he?
Yeah.
Yeah, he's...
He's had it, you know.
He's really had it.
That's why he envies those fish.
Why he tries to get the foam back.
But he does say it at the end.
I guess one reason he loved them is because they were going home to die.
Yeah.
They were going home and they were finished.
They'd done their work, which he kind of does.
Well, in fact, that's the quote, the fish.
They had been finished and coming home.
And, of course, you know, and you could see the setup there, but I have to say John's having the poems was, that's, it caught me.
What?
The fact that John had the poems.
John?
The Indian.
Oh, that he had them.
It's because she had them.
It's because...
Because Rowan had them.
Rowan had the poem, she hid them.
She hid them.
She hid the stuff of her father's.
A couple of his poems.
And she had the... John found the poem because Rowan had hidden it.
When he went through her thing.
But the two poems too, the ones that... I have to say, you know, I'm trying to see these things, where they're going.
And you got me there.
It was really...
Very, very, very powerful story.
I'm working on a new book, I have to tell you.
I had a book come out two years ago called A Gentle Madness.
It was about bibliomania, 2,500 years.
Oh, yeah, I heard about that.
It did pretty good, actually.
It was a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award last year, and it just went into its sixth printing.
I mean, that's a topic a lot of people are...
you know are are really interested in there are so many collectors yeah well i told the stories about it too which is you talk to larry mcmurtry larry didn't want uh we corresponded and he he opted out uh but i did use a quote from one of his novels as an epigraph uh zach jenks anything can be anywhere you know which i love there's a guy in detroit who is toby holtzman yeah that's the guy toby toby's in the book
Yeah, I'm right.
He belongs there.
In fact, I talked to you about him, in fact, without mentioning you, but I mean, any number of authors hide from him when he shows up.
Yeah, well, he seems demented.
He seems utterly demented.
But he's, you know, probably the major collector in America.
Yeah, of Martin Furst, maybe, of what he collects, of the things that he collects.
But the guy is dedicated to books, you see.
Yeah.
And this new book I'm working on is not about collecting, but it's about book culture on the eve of a new millennium.
Right now.
Yeah, like right now.
But also I'm going to do a historical thing of libraries and libraries of the future.
I just went to the... This is relevant to this, by the way, because I do want to ask you a couple of questions.
Two weeks ago I was at the MIT Media Lab, you know, where they're developing the book of the future.
And it's a book...
And it looks like a book.
It feels like a book.
It has pages, and you can load each book with 3,000 different books.
Wow.
Can you hang on with me?
Sure.
Right.
Yeah, well, Rowan here, her books are so important, and John keeps her books of her.
Very, very interesting.
I mean, there is a sense of books here as part of the lives of your characters.
And you're basically a man who's been educated by his books, as my sense.
Is that a fair observation?
Yeah, that's certainly fair.
I mean, I've read that you left high school and, you know, it's like George Bernard Shaw.
I mean, his university was the British Library.
Yeah, well, it was a similar situation.
Is that a fact?
Yeah.
I mean, what I was good at in school, which was basically English and history and Latin, you know, I did fine.
As a matter of fact, I got a scholarship.
my junior year just before I quit from the state for a translation of the speech of Cicero's, which I did very freely.
Come on.
No, I'm not kidding.
I mean, would I make it up?
No, I'm not suggesting that you did.
I'm just kind of shocked that you translated Cicero as a junior in high school.
I was a senior.
I quit my senior year.
And, yeah, I mean, I made it a very free translation.
And I guess the examiner just found it refreshing because it wasn't exactly word for word, but it was very much in the spirit of that particular speech against Caroline.
and I got a I got a state scholarship for it but I never used the scholarship because I quit school. Do you find that reading has energized your creative spirit or obviously traveling and what you've experienced in life and the people that you've met in the experiences. Yeah but I'm always reading. I'm always reading. I mean certainly it has. I've never stopped reading. I've always got a book.
And I read someplace that Beckett remains the main man.
Is that wise?
I don't know if this was Samuel Beckett as a person who was greatly influenced here.
I don't know about influenced.
I think Beckett was the greatest writer of the century in many ways.
Beckett, of course, who wrote in French and writes that very spare kind of Irish English when he translates it,
It's so Irish.
It has that touch of Irishness to it, I've always thought.
It has a kind of funny little Irish irony that isn't the way I write.
If you take a book like Malloy, that's nothing like what I do.
But I think his plays and a lot of his novels, like Malone Dies and Malloy, stand among the greatest work of the century.
I couldn't say I was influenced by him, but I regard him as a great, great writer.
To get back to the novella and the collection here, and I don't want to talk about the individual stories in here, because it's my job to read them and to...
to talk about them.
But I am impressed that, you know, to create a poet, obviously, you have to create his poetry.
Could you talk about the challenge that that involved?
And, of course, this person is not you.
This person is smart, you know.
Well, I had to be smart to write the poem the time I was writing the poem.
I saw those fish up on the town of Alaska.
I mean, that was a sight I saw.
And I always wanted to write a poem about it.
And I never could get one to my satisfaction.
Like, you know, as with stories, I'm kind of a perfectionist with poems.
And so I gave it to Smart to be his poem.
And I left it somewhat fragmentary.
But, you know, it's Smart's poem, but it's my poem.
But it doesn't have to be perfect because it's Smart's poem, does it?
It doesn't have to be complete.
It can remain a fragment.
And yet you still get the satisfaction of having done that poem.
Right.
That's great.
Tell me about the exercise of writing.
This is the first collection, so we should talk about that.
This is also the 30th anniversary year of your first novel.
That's right.
which we'll get to the novel in progress, but have you looked at stories as kind of finger exercises, as limbering up?
No, I have a tremendous respect for the short story.
I think some of the greatest works of the 20th century are short stories, like some of Hemingway's and some of Joyce's.
If there's a better story in the world than Araby, than Joyce's Araby, I don't know what it is.
The Open Boat I like a lot.
Yeah, The Open Boat is, you know, his, I mean, that's Crane's greatest work, I think.
Once is fiction and once is non-fiction.
The Open Boat is good.
No, I'm not, I have a lot of respect for it, maybe too much.
Maybe that's why I don't do enough.
I hope to do more.
Well,
Why 30 years then for the first collection to appear?
I think because I was just kind of daunted and I was always working on a novel and I was always behind.
And I did a lot of essays and assigned work in between, you know, and so forth.
And I never sat down.
And my standards were just, I think my standards were impossibly high.
I just could never meet them.
Hmm.
And I... I mean, I did the first one a long time ago, back in 1969.
Well, that's right.
I saw that date, yeah.
Yeah.
But...
I don't know.
Did you work on it for this collection, or does that reflect Robert Stone in 1969?
It pretty much reflects 1969.
I didn't really go back and work on it.
How do you feel about that?
You know, Henry James, when he did the New York edition, I mean, he fooled around with the novels.
Yes, I know.
Well, I was tempted to do that, but I figured... Were you tempted to do that?
I mean, I did reread them, and I thought of...
making changes.
My wife was always against it, and I sort of listened to her.
Do you have an attitude on that, that completed work is completed work?
In a way.
In a way, I think that was it.
I mean, you know, I had nothing more really to add to that story.
I mean, that's just a goofy story about a bunch of heads, you know, in a time and place where, you know, kind of long gone.
But it has its, you know, it has its resonance for now.
If anybody wonders, you know, what it was like when all this crazy shit began, you know, where the war began.
Well, where it does reflect 30 years of work, I mean, are you alert to that, that maybe the reader can see your development as a writer in these stories?
Perhaps.
I think I'm surprised.
I think the early stuff reads pretty well to me.
I don't know.
I would have to leave that to the reader.
I don't know the answer to that.
But then obviously it hasn't occurred to you either in that respect.
Well, it's occurred to me.
Yeah.
I mean, these stories get, you know, am I writing better?
You know, a lot better.
A little better.
It's occurred to me.
How are we coming on the new novel?
Oh, I'm coming along.
I hope to finish it before June, the end of June.
And...
I would like to bring it out on the spring list next year.
So that would be almost like a conjunction of the planets to have two stone books out within a year.
Yeah, I don't know whether it's a good idea or not.
It's more like five to seven.
But, yeah, it would be good to have it done, and I'd like to get into other things.
Yeah.
Other things, meaning other novels?
Other novels, and I'd like to try writing something to the theater and do more short stories, but principally other novels.
Now, in terms of stories, in terms of selection, there must have been... How many did you have to choose from, or was it pretty clear?
Were you looking for something thematic in this selection of stories?
Well, I was looking for the order.
The order concerned me.
I wanted the order to be right.
And it wasn't hard to pick because I don't do many short stories and I'm pretty perfectionistic.
If it wasn't up to it, I left it out.
Were there stories that were on the borderline?
I have a couple of stories sticking around.
I don't think they're... But I haven't sent them out yet because I don't think they're ready.
So therefore, this book, this collection of stories, in your view, should be considered...
Right up there with the novels.
I mean, these are not exercises, in your view.
No, no.
Because of the standards that you have placed upon them.
No, I don't see them as mere exercises.
I mean, I guess I would put them up there with the novels.
I mean, I don't see it as lesser.
It's shorter.
There's less in it.
But I don't think, you know, as a work of art, it's a lesser vehicle.
There's a quote here, this enormous empty space from which God has absented himself.
You know, which I pulled out of the story.
I'm just wondering, you know, is it a case throughout the body of your work?
I mean, is it a case of...
You know, the fatal flaw, the gods throwing, as we said earlier, craps with our destinies like flies to wanton boys.
Are we to the gods, etc.?
Well, I think it's more or less that we're left on our own.
You know, I don't think it's so much God controlling destiny as just not being, just, you know, having...
imploded or something.
I mean, there's a number of doctrines around that, you know, from the Barthian Deus Absconditus to, you know, to the Kabbalistic Ensoph, the withdrawn God.
And I've always sort of seen things that way.
And do you...
feel that these characters have the so-called, you're talking about the theater, the fatal flaw, you know, that ultimately brings down the character.
Are we all the fatal flaw?
I think a lot of them are in need of salvation.
It's just not worth coming.
Okay.
This temple cavern, is this a place that you visited?
Well, there's a number of places out west kind of like that caverns and caverns and lava fields and so forth that are really kind of spooky.
And when you enter a place like this, do the stories start?
Do you feel the juices?
Do you feel narrative perking forth?
You feel the charge of the place.
I don't think the first time I went to
You know, there's lava beds out there in southern Idaho that I was thinking, you know, I'm going to write a story about this, but they kind of stayed with me.
But the images stay with you, and then, so it's almost impossible to pinpoint where this process gets going then.
Right.
I guess, right?
You know, I've always read a lot about Indian things, American Indian things.
I know the legends around the lava beds and so forth.
And that went in finally.
I didn't think of using that as a story.
I mean, I was thinking about writing about Indians.
But I did make him a Shoshone Paiute.
John hears the sun come up because Jack Wilson, as he was known, the guy who founded the ghost dance religion, was a Shoshone Paiute.
Uh-huh.
And the ghost dance religion really begins with him hearing the sun come up.
I'm not going to take up too much of your time this morning.
Is there anything you can tell me about the new novel, the title?
Damascus Gate.
Say again, I'm sorry?
And with the good Lord willing, we'll see it next year.
God willing.
That's great.
I won't hold you up this morning.
I'm sorry.
I thought you kind of expected me to call.
If she said anything, I spaced it.
I'm getting ready to go north.
There's just a lot of things going on.
I'm sorry not to be ready for you.
Listen, I'm going to let you go.
I've got plenty of stuff here.
I look forward to the novel.
I would much prefer to do these things in person.
I have to tell you, the telephone interview does.
There's a distance to it.
I'm sorry we couldn't do it.
I'm giving a talk out in Minneapolis next week, and there's a conflict there.
I'm surprised your guy gets too grand, though, for a talk out in Nevada.
In these places, that's a pretty good honorarium.
Yeah, that's, well, you know, he's getting, was he getting two grand each?
Two grand a pop, yeah, for six.
That's not, well, I mean, the honorariums have, they've gone up a little.
They have, in fact.
He's a local poet, and he's not altogether unknown, and they have, and some of those places have,
a fair amount of money.
They do.
I'm discovering a little bit of this myself.
That scene where he throws the poems at the window, though, is this something that you've heard about?
Oh, I don't know where it got there.
You talk about self-destructive behavior.
Well, that's this guy.
Yeah.
Listen, thank you very much.
Is it a nice day down there?
It's beautiful.
I mean, they do tend to be, especially in the early morning, you know, it's nice.
It's a nice time of year down here.
I'm curious, have you gone out at night to look at the comet?
I haven't, no.
I've read about the comet somewhere.
Go out about 7.15.
Well, it may be a little later down there.
You've got to catch it early in the night in the northwest sky.
It's awesome.
Well, I really might.
You've got a couple weeks to see it, and I won't be back for 70,000 years or something.
Well, I'd better make it this time.
Okay.
Thanks for your time.
You bet.
Good luck.
Bye.